Add blog: Our context warehouse knows your data, the semantic layer tells it what to trust (#19103)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/semantic-layer.md

Reviewer: If we do this right, there is a cheeky chunk of SEO traffic to capture here 🤔 

<img width="776" height="150" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c3c66677-165b-4ce0-acc4-7ac6bb0cb093" />

Reviewer: some backlinks to add:

  - **`contents/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse.md`** (line 27) — linked "semantic layer"
  in _"This isn't just an agent bolted onto a data warehouse, or a smarter [semantic
  layer](/blog/semantic-layer) sitting on top of one."
  - **`contents/blog/why-you-should-use-a-data-warehouse.md`** (line 86) — linked "metric
  definitions" in _"That can include not just what data should be referenced, but also
  [metric definitions](/blog/semantic-layer), canonical tables or models, query versions,
  and more."_

---

> title: Our context warehouse knows your data, the semantic layer tells it what to trust

Reviewer: Building as a bit of a doubt meaning here 
```suggestion
title: Building a semantic layer: What it is and how we did it at PostHog
```

Reviewer: I think this launch is awesome, so I just want to focus the title a bit more on semantic layer.

Reviewer: Brainstorming
```suggestion
title: Solve the MRR problem. Build a semantic layer in PostHog
```

```suggestion
title: Build a semantic layer in PostHog. Solve the MRR problem
```

Reviewer 2: I'd go with this: 

> Building a semantic layer: What it is and how we did it at PostHog

the MRR ones are a bit too specific for me (it solves way more than that!) but maybe the specificity is what would help? idk.. i would keep it more general but it's a loosely held opinion

date: 2026-07-30
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
    - thiago-rocha-salvatore
    - lizzie-epton
featuredImage: >-
    https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/semantic_layer_blog_header_a19ba93b69.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
    - Context Warehouse
    - Data Modeling
seo:
    metaTitle: Our context warehouse knows your data, the semantic layer tells it what to trust
    metaDescription: A semantic layer is a governed catalog of definitions that sits on top of your existing data and tells agents and people what to trust. Here's how we built one into PostHog's context warehouse.
---

> Ask Claude, Cursor, and PostHog's own AI the same question: "what was our MRR last month?", and you'll get three different queries and three different numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ask Claude, Cursor, and PostHog AI the same question: "what was our MRR last month?", and you'll get three different queries and three different numbers.
```

> I did exactly this, half-expecting the tools to agree. They didn't; one summed a Stripe table, one found a slightly different Stripe table, and one tried to reconstruct recurring revenue from raw events and got the proration wrong. Every method and number was plausible, and there was no way to tell which was right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I did exactly this, half-expecting the tools to agree. They didn't; one summed a Stripe table, one found a slightly different Stripe table, and one tried to reconstruct recurring revenue from raw events and got the proration wrong. Every method and number was plausible, but there was no way to tell which was right.
```

The problem is that "MRR", what it means at PostHog, which table holds it, and how it's calculated, all lives in people's heads. So every agent session reinvents the definition from scratch, slightly differently.

Humans have this problem too. Every new analyst re-learns which revenue table is the real one and how Stripe is connected each time they join a new company. Agents just amplify the issue by answering confidently and hallucinating to fill the gaps in their knowledge, and nobody thinks to double check it.

> You can't fix it with a smarter model. You need to give every agent a single place to read the definition from, so "MRR" means the same thing on every call. That place is the semantic layer, and this is the story of building it into [PostHog's context warehouse.](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse)

Reviewer: Do 
```suggestion
You can't fix it with a smarter model. You need to give every agent a single place to read the definition from, so "MRR" means the same thing on every call. That place is the [semantic layer](/docs/semantic-layer), and this is the story of building it into [PostHog's context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse).
```

<!-- SCREENSHOT: the same "what was our MRR last month?" question producing different SQL / different answers across two agents --> ![What was our MRR last month](XX)

## What is a semantic layer?

A semantic layer is a dictionary of definitions that everyone (agent and human) reads from. You define MRR once, approve it once, and every query you run from then on returns the same number.

The most important thing to understand about it is what it doesn't do. It doesn't copy your data, replace your warehouse, or move a single row of data. It sits on top of the data you already have and describes it, "this is what MRR means, this is the table to trust, this is how these two sources connect." It's a map, not a second copy of the territory. That's why it's called a layer.

What it's really fixing is three kinds of knowledge that only exists as tribal memory:

* **What our metrics are:** MRR isn't just "revenue", it's a specific calculation over a specific source.

> * **Which tables to trust (and which tables to avoid):** A mature project imports dozens of sources and builds hundreds of data models. Plenty of them could answer "revenue." Only one is current and blessed as accurate by the finance team. Others can be useful too, but there might be tables that we should avoid as much as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Which tables to trust (and which tables to avoid):** A mature project imports dozens of [sources](/docs/data-warehouse/sources) and builds hundreds of data models. Plenty of them could answer "revenue." Only one is current and blessed as accurate by the finance team. Others can be useful too, but there might be tables that we should avoid as much as possible.
```

> * **How the data joins together:** The Stripe customer ID maps to an organization property, but only after a format cast, and nothing tells you that except the analyst who figured it out last time.

Reviewer: what's a format cast? is this simpler?
```suggestion
* **How the data joins together:** The Stripe customer ID maps to an organization property, but only after it's reformatted, and nothing tells you that except the analyst who figured it out last time.
```

> If you're a small company with a handful of tables, you probably know where everything is. But, as you grow you add more data sources and more models, that number you used to understand stops being obvious to anyone, least of all to an AI agent seeing your schema for the first time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're a small company with a handful of tables, you probably know where everything is. But, as you grow you add more data sources and models, the meaning of those tables stop being obvious, least of all to an AI agent seeing your schema for the first time.
```

> **Semantic layer** /sɪˈmæntɪk ˈleɪə/ – *noun*. A governed catalog of definitions that sits on top of your existing data and tells people and machines what it means: what each metric is, which tables to trust, and how sources connect. It describes the data; it doesn't copy or move it.
>
> **Glossary**
> * **Catalog:** the structured, queryable inventory the semantic layer maintains.
> * **Metric:** a named, governed definition of a business measure, like MRR.
> * **Governed:** nothing becomes official until a human approves it.

## Where this lives: The context warehouse

> The [context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse) is where PostHog pulls together everything an agent needs to answer questions. That includes product events, imported sources like your Stripe data, and data models, into one place, optimized for agents to use. The semantic layer is a key part of that stack making sure agents have the context of what your data means to be able to interpret it correctly.

Reviewer: "context" overload a bit in this paragraph. 
```suggestion
The [context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse) is where PostHog pulls together everything an agent needs to answer questions. That includes product events, imported sources like your [Stripe data](/docs/cdp/sources/stripe), and data models, into one place, optimized for agents to use. The semantic layer makes sure agents know what your data means and can interpret it correctly.
```

> The design decision that integrates the semantic layer so fully is that **the catalog is just SQL**. Everything the layer knows shows up as ordinary tables. Metrics are a table. There's no bespoke "catalog API" for an agent to learn; if it can run `execute-sql`, it already knows how to read the entire semantic layer. Discovery is a query, not an integration.

Reviewer: I think I miss a bit about what a catalog is so adding that again here. 
```suggestion
A catalog actually stores the semantic layer. What integrates it so fully is that it is **just SQL.** Every definition shows up as ordinary tables. Metrics are a table. There's no bespoke "catalog API" for an agent to learn; if it can run `execute-sql`, it already knows how to read the entire semantic layer. Discovery is a query, not an integration.
```

> The reason three tools gave three MRR numbers is that each had to invent an answer. Now the first thing any agent does is check the catalog: is there an approved metric? If so, it runs the governed definition instead of writing its own SQL. Same question, same number, every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason three tools gave three MRR numbers is that each had to invent an answer. When you have a catalog, it becomes the first thing any agent checks: is there an approved metric? If so, it runs the governed definition instead of writing its own SQL. Same question, same number, every time.
```

<!-- SCREENSHOT: the typed-confirm approval flow in an MCP client — agent proposes, human types "confirm" -->![What was our MRR last month](XX)

> ## AI generates, a human owns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## AI generated, human owned
```

> Agents are genuinely good at proposing improvements to your data governance. Point one at your schema and it'll happily draft metric definitions, suggest which tables look canonical, and spot likely joins from column names and sample data. Doing the tedious first pass is useful, but giving an agent edit access to your data widens the gap between trusting your data and not being sure.

Reviewer: I don't fully understand "Doing the tedious first pass is useful, but giving an agent edit access to your data widens the gap between trusting your data and not being sure."

```suggestion
Agents are genuinely good at proposing improvements to your data governance. Point one at your schema and it'll happily draft metric definitions, suggest which tables look canonical, and spot likely joins from column names and sample data. Letting agent do the tedious first pass is useful, but going further are letting it edit doesn't improve understanding, it muddles it further.
```

maybe "trust" instead of "understanding" in the last paragraph.

So everything an agent creates lands as `proposed`. Nothing an agent touches is ever canonical on its own. A human promotes it, approving a metric, certifying a table, accepting a join. We added two guardrails to verify any definition changes even after approval:

* Edit an approved metric's definition and it drops straight back to `proposed`. Changing what a number means re-opens the question of whether it's right.

> * If a metric was built from an existing insight and someone later edits that insight, the metric gets flagged as **drifted**. It's a signal that the definition it was born from has moved and a human should re-review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Editing an approved metric's definition drops it straight back to `proposed`. Changing what a number means re-opens the question of whether it's right.
2. If a metric was built from an existing insight and someone edits that insight, the metric gets flagged as **drifted**. It's a signal that the definition it was born from has moved and a human should re-review.
```

Which gives agents one simple rule to live by: a result is canonical only when `status = 'approved'` and `is_drifted = false`. Everything else including proposed, drifted, and archived, gets labeled non-canonical, and a well-trained agent will tell you so rather than passing it off as gospel.

## The design decisions we made (and the ones we didn't)

> The interesting part of building this was the tempting-looking arch choices we walked away from. Almost every simplification you reach for first turns out to break in a way that shows up later as a wrong number. Here are a few of the choices we didn't make:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interesting part of building this was the tempting-looking architecture choices we walked away from. Almost every simplification you reach for first turns out to break in a way that shows up later as a wrong number. Here are a few of the choices we didn't make:
```

> ### "Why not just make every metric a SQL query?"

Reviewer: Something I'm missing at this point, how are metrics stored? I don't remember seeing anything about this so I'm reading this bit trying to understand what they would be stored as if not SQL.

Author: @thiagosalvatore pinging you to answer Ian's question and I can add that into the blog^

Reviewer 3: Does this answer your question @ivanagas ?

https://posthog.com/docs/semantic-layer/metrics#two-kinds-of-definition

Reviewer: yes, definitely worth adding somewhere in here

This is the first thing everyone suggests: funnels and trends all compile down to SQL eventually, so why not require every metric to be SQL and be done with it? Because the same metric written by hand as SQL gives a different number than the insight it came from.

> Take activation, which at PostHog is a funnel. To make it SQL-only, someone has to rewrite that funnel by hand. PostHog's funnel engine does a lot under the hood: steps have to happen in order, per person, inside a conversion window, with exclusions and deduplication applied. A hand-written SQL version gets some of that wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take activation, which at PostHog is a funnel. To make it SQL-only, someone must rewrite that funnel by hand. PostHog's funnel engine does a lot under the hood: steps happen in order, per person, inside a conversion window, with exclusions and deduplication applied. A hand-written SQL version gets some of that wrong.
```

Storing the metric as the same funnel definition the insight uses, and running it through the same engine, makes that mismatch impossible. The metric and the dashboard execute identical queries. That guarantee is why we support insight-shaped metrics, not just SQL.

### "Why not write definitions in plain English?"

> We took the good part of it, a metric can be defined using a Markdown structure, where the user defines, step by step, how the agent should calculate the given metric. However, it has limitations compared to other types of metrics as it is less deterministic compared to insight-backed and SQL-backed metrics.

Reviewer: Trying to use less commas and avoid duplicating metric and make second sentence clearer. 

```suggestion
A good part of it is. Users can define how the agent should calculate a given metric using a Markdown structure. However, plain English is limited because it is less deterministic than insight-backed and SQL-backed metrics.
```

### "Why not just point a metric at an existing insight?"

> Insights already blend SQL, funnels, and trends, and pointing at one would keep the metric and the dashboard in lockstep. The problem is that insights are shared objects that people edit all day, and "editing the definition resets approval" is impossible to enforce on something everyone's mutating. So instead of pointing at the insight, `metric-create` takes the insight, snapshots its query, and remembers where it came from. You get lockstep awareness with the drift flag, without handing governance to an object anyone can change on a whim.

Reviewer: I would like the second paragraph that actually defines how a metric is defined earlier so I can compare it against alternatives. 
```suggestion
Insights already blend SQL, funnels, and trends. Pointing at one would keep the metric and the dashboard in lockstep. The problem is that insights are shared objects that people edit all day. "Editing the definition resets approval" is impossible to enforce on something everyone's mutating. 

Instead of pointing at the insight, `metric-create` takes the insight, snapshots its query, and remembers where it came from. You get lockstep awareness with the drift flag, without handing governance to an object anyone can change on a whim.
```

### "Why not build a semantic query language, like dbt?"

> That's the "right" long-term answer for composing non-SQL metrics into arbitrary queries, and it's exactly what we chose not to build in v1. It's a whole new language for both humans and agents to learn, plus a compiler to maintain forever, even dbt won't let you plain-`SELECT` a metric in a random editor; you go through their compiling API. Our `metric-run` endpoint is the same architecture minus the language. If usage data later shows people really need in-editor composition, there's a path we can take to get there. Until then, it's complexity we haven't earned.

Reviewer: same architecture as dbt?
```suggestion
That's the "right" long-term answer for composing non-SQL metrics into arbitrary queries, and it's exactly what we chose not to build in v1. It's a whole new language for both humans and agents to learn, plus a compiler to maintain forever. Even dbt won't let you plain-`SELECT` a metric in a random editor, you must go through their compiling API. 

Our `metric-run` endpoint is the same architecture minus the language. If usage data later shows people really need in-editor composition, there's a path we can take to get there. Until then, it's complexity we haven't earned.
```

> SQL metrics are defined over a saved view. Create the view first, point the metric at it, and the metric stays composable with plain SQL. Views are already PostHog's "queryable named SQL" primitive, so we reused them instead of inventing a parallel one.

Reviewer: I think if we define how we define metrics, and include this as part of it, we can probably remove this paragraph too.

> SQL metrics are defined over a saved view. Create the view first, point the metric at it, and the metric stays composable with plain SQL. Views are already PostHog's "queryable named SQL" primitive, so we reused them instead of inventing a parallel one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL metrics are defined over a [saved view](/docs/data-warehouse/views)). Create the view first, point the metric at it, and the metric stays composable with plain SQL. Views are already PostHog's "queryable named SQL" primitive, so we reused them instead of inventing a parallel one.
```

> ## Where it's going

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's next for semantic layering in PostHog
```

> The PostHog semantic layer is in beta right now, you can work with it through MCP tools, PostHog's UI and SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PostHog semantic layer is in beta right now, you can work with it through [MCP tools](/docs/semantic-layer/mcp-tools), PostHog's UI and [SQL](/docs/semantic-layer/query).
```

> We're measuring success around this bet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're measuring success around this by checking:
```

* Do agents get questions right? The bar we set is ≥80% on a fixed set of golden questions, clearly above a baseline with no catalog.
* When an approved metric exists, do agents actually use it instead of deriving their own number?
* Does the catalog keep growing through everyday use, or does it spike during setup and then go silent?

> As more of what we build becomes agent-driven, reliable data is the difference between an AI you can trust and one you can't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As more of what [we build becomes agent-driven](/newsletter/2030-shaped-software), reliable data is the difference between an AI you can trust and one you can't.
```

> The semantic layer is in beta. Want access, or hit a bug? Let me know!

Reviewer: Open beta?

We should have a link to here: https://posthog.com/docs/semantic-layer/start-here

And maybe even say "set up MCP and ask your agent to recommend a new semantic layer catalog" or some prompt like that. We can have the MCP wizard component in here too.

Author: @thiagosalvatore could you check the wording of the CTA I've added here makes sense?

I did exactly this, half-expecting the tools to agree. They didn't; one summed a Stripe table, one found a slightly different Stripe table, and one tried to reconstruct recurring revenue from raw events and got the proration wrong. Every method and number was plausible, but there was no way to tell which was right.

The problem is that "MRR", what it means at PostHog, which table holds it, and how it's calculated, all lives in people's heads. So every agent session reinvents the definition from scratch, slightly differently.

Humans have this problem too. Every new analyst re-learns which revenue table is the real one and how Stripe is connected each time they join a new company. Agents just amplify the issue by answering confidently and hallucinating to fill the gaps in their knowledge, and nobody thinks to double check it.

You can't fix it with a smarter model. You need to give every agent a single place to read the definition from, so "MRR" means the same thing on every call. That place is the [semantic layer](/docs/semantic-layer), and this is the story of building it into [PostHog's context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse).

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe i would add a single sentence around how it is a universal definition layer, not just for revenue, which then connect it well with the next section, where we go deeper explaining the semantic layer

<!-- SCREENSHOT: the same "what was our MRR last month?" question producing different SQL / different answers across two agents --> ![What was our MRR last month](XX)

## What is a semantic layer?

A semantic layer is a dictionary of definitions that everyone (agent and human) reads from. You define MRR once, approve it once, and every query you run from then on returns the same number.

The most important thing to understand about it is what it doesn't do. It doesn't copy your data, replace your warehouse, or move a single row of data. It sits on top of the data you already have and describes it, "this is what MRR means, this is the table to trust, this is how these two sources connect." It's a map, not a second copy of the territory. That's why it's called a layer.

What it's really fixing is three kinds of knowledge that only exists as tribal memory:

* **What our metrics are:** MRR isn't just "revenue", it's a specific calculation over a specific source.

> * **Which tables to trust (and which tables to avoid):** A mature project imports dozens of [sources](/docs/data-warehouse/sources) and builds hundreds of data models. Plenty of them could answer "revenue." Only one is current and blessed as accurate by the finance team. Others can be useful too, but there might be tables that we should avoid as much as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Which tables to trust (and which tables to avoid):** A mature project imports dozens of [sources](/docs/data-warehouse/sources) and builds hundreds of data models. Plenty of them could answer "revenue." Only one is current and blessed as accurate by the finance team. Others can be useful too, but there might be tables that we should avoid as much as possible, e.g. they have been deprecated.
```

### "Why not just point a metric at an existing insight?"

Insights already blend SQL, funnels, and trends, and pointing at one would keep the metric and the dashboard in lockstep. The problem is that insights are shared objects that people edit all day, and "editing the definition resets approval" is impossible to enforce on something everyone's mutating. So instead of pointing at the insight, `metric-create` takes the insight, snapshots its query, and remembers where it came from. You get lockstep awareness with the drift flag, without handing governance to an object anyone can change on a whim.

### "Why not build a semantic query language, like dbt?"

That's the "right" long-term answer for composing non-SQL metrics into arbitrary queries, and it's exactly what we chose not to build in v1. It's a whole new language for both humans and agents to learn, plus a compiler to maintain forever. Even dbt won't let you plain-`SELECT` a metric in a random editor, you must go through their compiling API. 

> Our `metric-run` endpoint is the same architecture minus the language. If usage data later shows people really need in-editor composition, there's a path we can take to get there. Until then, it's complexity we haven't earned.

Reviewer 2: > Until then, it's complexity we haven't earned.

I really like this phrasing!! 👌

---
title: Building a semantic layer: What it is and how we did it at PostHog

> date: 2026-07-30

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2026-08-13
```

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
    - thiago-rocha-salvatore
    - lizzie-epton
featuredImage: >-
    https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/semantic_layer_blog_header_a19ba93b69.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
    - Context Warehouse
    - Data Modeling
seo:
    metaTitle: Our context warehouse knows your data, the semantic layer tells it what to trust
    metaDescription: A semantic layer is a governed catalog of definitions that sits on top of your existing data and tells agents and people what to trust. Here's how we built one into PostHog's context warehouse.
---

Ask Claude, Cursor, and PostHog AI the same question: "what was our MRR last month?", and you'll get three different queries and three different numbers.

I did exactly this, half-expecting the tools to agree. They didn't; one summed a Stripe table, one found a slightly different Stripe table, and one tried to reconstruct recurring revenue from raw events and got the proration wrong. Every method and number was plausible, but there was no way to tell which was right.

> The problem is that "MRR", what it means at PostHog, which table holds it, and how it's calculated, all lives in people's heads. So every agent session reinvents the definition from scratch, slightly differently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem is what "MRR" means at PostHog, which table holds it, and how it's calculated all lives in people's heads. So every agent session reinvents the definition from scratch, slightly differently.
```

> Humans have this problem too. Every new analyst re-learns which revenue table is the real one and how Stripe is connected each time they join a new company. Agents just amplify the issue by answering confidently and hallucinating to fill the gaps in their knowledge, and nobody thinks to double check it.

Reviewer: I think this is simpler and gets the same point across. 
```suggestion
Humans have this problem too. Every new analyst needs to learns which revenue table is the real one and how Stripe is connected. Agents just amplify the issue by answering confidently and hallucinating to fill the gaps in their knowledge, and nobody thinks to double check it.
```

> You can't fix it with a smarter model. You need to give every agent a single place to read the definition from, so "MRR", and every other metric you want to define, means the same thing on every call. That place is the [semantic layer](/docs/semantic-layer), and this is the story of building it into [PostHog's context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can't fix it with a smarter model. You need to give every agent a single place to read the definition from so "MRR", and every other metric you want to define, mean the same thing on every call. That place is the [semantic layer](/docs/semantic-layer), and this is the story of building it into [PostHog's context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse).
```

![What was our MRR last month](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/semantic_layer_ARR_1_a228fa4bdb.png)

## What is a semantic layer?

A semantic layer is a dictionary of definitions that everyone (agent and human) reads from. You define MRR once, approve it once, and every query you run from then on returns the same number.

The most important thing to understand about it is what it doesn't do. It doesn't copy your data, replace your warehouse, or move a single row of data. It sits on top of the data you already have and describes it, "this is what MRR means, this is the table to trust, this is how these two sources connect." It's a map, not a second copy of the territory. That's why it's called a layer.

> What it's really fixing is three kinds of knowledge that only exists as tribal memory:

Reviewer: More direct
```suggestion
It fixes is three kinds of knowledge that only exists as tribal memory:
```

* **What our metrics are:** MRR isn't just "revenue", it's a specific calculation over a specific source.

> * **Which tables to trust (and which tables to avoid):** A mature project imports dozens of [sources](/docs/data-warehouse/sources) and builds hundreds of data models. Plenty of them could answer "revenue." Only one is current and blessed as accurate by the finance team. Others can be useful too, but there might be tables that we should avoid as much as possible, e.g. they have been deprecated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Which tables to trust (and which tables to avoid):** A mature project imports dozens of [sources](/docs/data-warehouse/sources) and builds hundreds of data models. Plenty of them could answer "revenue." Only one is current and blessed as accurate by the finance team. Others can be useful too, but there might be tables that we should avoid, e.g. they have been deprecated. 
```

* **How the data joins together:** The Stripe customer ID maps to an organization property, but only after it's reformatted, and nothing tells you that except the analyst who figured it out last time.

> If you're a small company with a handful of tables, you probably know where everything is. But, as you grow you add more data sources and models, the meaning of those tables stop being obvious, least of all to an AI agent seeing your schema for the first time.

Reviewer: I think this is an important bit of familiarity too
```suggestion
If you're a small company with a handful of tables you interact with regularly, you probably know where everything is. But, as you grow, you add more data sources and models, the meaning of those tables stop being obvious, least of all to an AI agent seeing your schema for the first time.
```

> **Semantic layer** /sɪˈmæntɪk ˈleɪə/ – *noun*. A governed catalog of definitions that sits on top of your existing data and tells people and machines what it means: what each metric is, which tables to trust, and how sources connect. It describes the data; it doesn't copy or move it.
>
> **Glossary**
> * **Catalog:** the structured, queryable inventory the semantic layer maintains.
> * **Metric:** a named, governed definition of a business measure, like MRR.
> * **Governed:** nothing becomes official until a human approves it.

## Where this lives: The context warehouse

> The [context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse) is where PostHog pulls together everything an agent needs to answer questions. That includes product events, imported sources like your [Stripe data](/docs/cdp/sources/stripe), and data models, into one place, optimized for agents to use. The semantic layer makes sure agents know what your data means and can interpret it correctly.

Reviewer: This sentence basically repeats the one before and one after, I would tweak one of those with the "optimize" and "in one place" if you want to keep that specific wording.
```suggestion
The [context warehouse](/blog/what-is-a-context-warehouse) is where PostHog pulls together everything an agent needs to answer questions. That includes product events, imported sources like your [Stripe data](/docs/cdp/sources/stripe), and data models. The semantic layer makes sure agents know what your data means and can interpret it correctly.
```

A catalog actually stores the semantic layer. What integrates it so fully is that it is **just SQL.** Every definition shows up as ordinary tables. Metrics are a table. There's no bespoke "catalog API" for an agent to learn; if it can run `execute-sql`, it already knows how to read the entire semantic layer. Discovery is a query, not an integration.

The reason three tools gave three MRR numbers is that each had to invent an answer. When you have a catalog, it becomes the first thing any agent checks: is there an approved metric? If so, it runs the governed definition instead of writing its own SQL. Same question, same number, every time.

![What was our MRR last month](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/creating_approving_new_metric_9db2e60331.png)

## AI generated, human owned

> Agents are genuinely good at proposing improvements to your data governance. Point one at your schema and it'll happily draft metric definitions, suggest which tables look canonical, and spot likely joins from column names and sample data. Letting agents do the first pass is useful, but going further are letting it edit doesn't improve trust, it muddles it further.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agents are genuinely good at proposing improvements to your data governance. Point one at your schema and it'll happily draft metric definitions, suggest canonical tables, and spot likely joins from column names and sample data. Letting agents do the first pass is useful, but letting it edit doesn't improve trust, it muddles it further.  
```

So everything an agent creates lands as `proposed`. Nothing an agent touches is ever canonical on its own. A human promotes it, approving a metric, certifying a table, accepting a join. We added two guardrails to verify any definition changes even after approval:

1. Editing an approved metric's definition drops it straight back to `proposed`. Changing what a number means re-opens the question of whether it's right.
2. If a metric was built from an existing insight and someone edits that insight, the metric gets flagged as **drifted**. It's a signal that the definition it was born from has moved and a human should re-review.

> Which gives agents one simple rule to live by: a result is canonical only when `status = 'approved'` and `is_drifted = false`. Everything else including proposed, drifted, and archived, gets labeled non-canonical, and a well-trained agent will tell you so rather than passing it off as gospel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These give agents one simple rule to live by: a result is canonical only when `status = 'approved'` and `is_drifted = false`. Everything else including proposed, drifted, and archived, gets labeled non-canonical, and a well-trained agent will tell you so rather than passing it off as gospel.
```

## The design decisions we made (and the ones we didn't)

> The interesting part of building this was the tempting-looking architecture choices we walked away from. Almost every simplification you reach for first turns out to break in a way that shows up later as a wrong number. Here are a few of the choices we didn't make:

Reviewer: I think "almost" can cover a lot of ground in this sentence. 
```suggestion
The interesting part of building this was the tempting-looking architecture choices we walked away from. Almost every simplification you reach for breaks in a way that shows up later as a wrong number. Here are a few of the choices we didn't make:
```

### "Why not just make every metric a SQL query?"

This is the first thing everyone suggests: funnels and trends all compile down to SQL eventually, so why not require every metric to be SQL and be done with it? Because the same metric written by hand as SQL gives a different number than the insight it came from.

Take activation, which at PostHog is a funnel. To make it SQL-only, someone must rewrite that funnel by hand. PostHog's funnel engine does a lot under the hood: steps happen in order, per person, inside a conversion window, with exclusions and deduplication applied. A hand-written SQL version gets some of that wrong.

Storing the metric as the same funnel definition the insight uses, and running it through the same engine, makes that mismatch impossible. The metric and the dashboard execute identical queries. That guarantee is why we support insight-shaped metrics, not just SQL.

> So where does that definition live? When you create a metric from an insight, PostHog snapshots the insight's query and stores it on the metric server-side. That snapshot is what runs, which is how the metric and the insight stay in lockstep. It also means the metric can notice when it falls out of step: because the snapshot is stored but the insight keeps evolving, PostHog compares the two every time you read the metric and flags it as drifted if someone has changed the insight underneath it. Nothing runs in the background, the check happens live.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So where does that definition live? When you create a metric from an insight, PostHog snapshots the insight's query and stores it on the metric server-side. That snapshot is what runs, which is how the metric and the insight stay in lockstep. 

It also means the metric can notice when it falls out of step. Because the snapshot is stored but the insight keeps evolving, PostHog compares the two every time you read the metric and flags it as drifted if someone has changed the insight underneath it. Nothing runs in the background, the check happens live.
```

Insights already blend SQL, funnels, and trends. Pointing at one would keep the metric and the dashboard in lockstep. The problem is that insights are shared objects that people edit all day. "Editing the definition resets approval" is impossible to enforce on something everyone's mutating. 

Instead of pointing at the insight, `metric-create` takes the insight, snapshots its query, and remembers where it came from. You get lockstep awareness with the drift flag, without handing governance to an object anyone can change on a whim.

### "Why not build a semantic query language, like dbt?"

That's the "right" long-term answer for composing non-SQL metrics into arbitrary queries, and it's exactly what we chose not to build in v1. It's a whole new language for both humans and agents to learn, plus a compiler to maintain forever. Even dbt won't let you plain-`SELECT` a metric in a random editor, you must go through their compiling API. 

Our `metric-run` endpoint is the same architecture minus the language. If usage data later shows people really need in-editor composition, there's a path we can take to get there. Until then, it's complexity we haven't earned.

> SQL metrics are defined over a [saved view](/docs/data-warehouse/views)). Create the view first, point the metric at it, and the metric stays composable with plain SQL. Views are already PostHog's "queryable named SQL" primitive, so we reused them instead of inventing a parallel one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL metrics are defined over a [saved view](/docs/data-warehouse/views). Create the view first, point the metric at it, and the metric stays composable with plain SQL. Views are already PostHog's "queryable named SQL" primitive, so we reused them instead of inventing a parallel one.
```

## What's next for semantic layering in PostHog

> The PostHog semantic layer is in beta right now, you can work with it through [MCP tools](/docs/semantic-layer/mcp-tools), PostHog's UI and [SQL](/docs/semantic-layer/query).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PostHog semantic layer is in beta right now, you can work with it through [MCP tools](/docs/semantic-layer/mcp-tools), PostHog's UI, and [SQL](/docs/semantic-layer/query).
```

We're measuring success around this by checking:

* Do agents get questions right? The bar we set is ≥80% on a fixed set of golden questions, clearly above a baseline with no catalog.
* When an approved metric exists, do agents actually use it instead of deriving their own number?
* Does the catalog keep growing through everyday use, or does it spike during setup and then go silent?

As more of what [we build becomes agent-driven](/newsletter/2030-shaped-software), reliable data is the difference between an AI you can trust and one you can't.

> The semantic layer is in beta. Get started with [these instructions](https://posthog.com/docs/semantic-layer/start-here), or setup the [PostHog MCP](https://posthog.com/mcp) and ask your agent to recommend a new semantic layer catalog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The semantic layer is in beta. Get started with [these instructions](/docs/semantic-layer/start-here), or setup the [PostHog MCP](/mcp) and ask your agent to recommend a new semantic layer catalog.
```
